---
title: 'Learning Koopman Invariant Subspaces for Dynamic Mode Decomposition (A PyTorch Adventure)'
date: 2021-02-05
permalink: /posts/2021/02/lkis-in-pytorch/
tags:
  - free-form
---

Learning Koopman Invariant Subspaces for Dynamic Mode Decomposition (A PyTorch Adventure - Part 2)
======

By: Victor Ardulov


I think I got it, the gist of the paper/technique/how the code is supposed to work, and I'm working on my own implementation.
The epiphany was that the end-to-end model is effectively a fancy version of an auto-encoder. Well, sorta... The key 
insight I made was that $$KIS$$ (The notation I have chosen to represent the end-to-end model) is effectively a modified
auto-encoder in that given some dataset $$Y = [y_0, y_1, ..., y_n]$$ such that $$y \in \mathcal{Y} = \mathbb{R}^{d}$$ is
the $d$-dimensional domain of out observations then $$KIS: \mathcal{Y}^{L} \rightarrow \mathcal{Y}$$ but it does so through
a non-linear embedding space where $$L$$ is the delay used to represent the time alignment.

The other insight was into recognizing that the procedure laid out in the original code base to compute gradient and train
the model was largely overkill. Mainly what I mean is that the researchers make the model return what they refer to as 
$$Y_0$$, $$Y_1$$, $$g_0$$ and $$g_1$$ in order to compute the losses. However as we realized in the previous post, the
data is just a time shifted varient of themselves, so by just return $$\hat{Y} = Y_0 \cup Y_1$$ which is necessary for 
computing the reconstructive loss anyway, and $$g = g_0 \cup g_1$$ then I can extract out $$g_0$$ and $$g_1$$ "on the fly".

```python
time_delayed_ys, y_true = next(batch_iterator)

g_pred, y_pred = lkis(time_delayed_ys)
g_0 = g_pred[:-1]
g_1 = g_pred[1:]

loss = combined_loss(y_true, y_pred, g_0, g_1)
```

Now I just need the single pair of outputs from the network to really hone in on the thing being predicted. So finally,
the point that I was trying to get to about the fancy auto-encoder makes sense now. The input is a time-delayed time-step,
and the output is the last time-step, however when the model is training you also use the intermediate steps in order to 
learn the rule invariant representation of $$A = (g_1 \cdot g_0^{\dagger})(g_0)$$ which abides to the $$g_1 = A g_0$$ 
logic, ergo the invariant subspace angle.

I also spent some time this weekend contemplating how this might be extended to incorporate the control signal, and I think
it's pretty straight-forward to expect a small update on that in the near future. That will hopefully be more accessible 
than the original paper on this approach.